Introduction:

Theories, models, and principles of education and training are important for both the students and teachers. These models, theories, and principles are professionally researched and proved. That is why using these will be beneficial for the students, teachers, and schools, and colleges.  

This report discusses about various theories, models and principles of learning, communication, assessment, curriculum development, assessment, and evaluation. The theories, models and principles are well described in this report. 

 Furthermore, this report analyzes how these theories, models and principles of learning, communication, assessment, curriculum development and assessment and evaluation can be applied to learning and teaching. 


1.1	Analyse theories, principles and models of learning

Two theories of learning are discussed below:

1)	Brain Based Learning(Neurolism): Brain-based learning is a learning method that refers to some specific strategies after researching how the human brain thinks, memorize, and work. It is mostly based on the belief that the learning process of students can be accelerated if the brain is prepared well and the teaching methods are well-strategized and organized. Brain-based learning is dependent on more brain-friendly teaching techniques. One of the most sit back of our education system is that it does not let the students apply their learning. If any teacher implements brain-based learning in their classrooms, he/she will let the students apply their learning and solve their problems. It will help the student’s brain in realizing how to solve a problem. Gardner (1983) states that “The difference between individuals is attributed to the kind of intelligence they possessed at their birth; including the method they use to develop it”. Every person is born with various kinds of abilities and talents. What differentiates them but along with that is how a person has developed their skills and applied them in life is also something important which makes people different. Kendra Cherry (2021) states that “Gardner theorizes that people do not have just an intellectual capacity, but have many kinds of intelligence, including musical, interpersonal, spatial-visual, and linguistic intelligence”. Brain-based learning plays a key role in people’s life while realizing and developing their talents. Brain-based learning slowly develops people’s brains and with time students' knowledge retention and academic performances start to increase.
2)	Humanism: Humanism theory is students centered method of learning. It focuses on the student's capabilities, growth, decision-making ability, and creativity. The fact that the learning process is different for every student and they should be given the freedom to choose their goals and aim is what humanism theory is based on. According to Christopher (2010) ”In 1980, Knowles made 4 assumptions about the characteristics of adult learners (andragogy)”. Knowles proposed 4 principles that can be applied to adult learning. The focus of his was on the fact that there needs to be a specific reason for why the lesson is being taught and students should not be taught everything. Teachers should give students the chance to learn and solve problems by themselves. Even if they make mistakes, it is good for them in the longer run. It will help the students to become more independent and their learning process will become more efficient. 
1.2	Explain ways in which theories, principles and models of learning can be applied to teaching, learning and assessment.

Theories, principles, and models of learning help teachers and students to enjoy the learning process. Theories, principles, and models of learning can be applied to teaching, learning, and assessment.  
  
Teachers need to make a positive relationship with the students. Every student learns differently and has different learning preferences. Some are fond of reading and writing learning, some are fond of audible learning, some like visual learning. Teachers need to take account of these things while teaching in the classroom. Teachers can make different learning folders for each student. That will help both the teacher and student to understand their strengths and weaknesses. Teachers can break a big topic into smaller chunks so that the students do not get scared by watching the topic. People are social beings and social interaction helps a person to develop his brain. That is why teachers need to distribute a few classes works and home works in a group. So that students can interact with themselves and understand how to solve a problem as a team. Moreover, teachers need to organize art and music sessions with students. Art and music will help students to relax and students can show their creativity there. Teachers need to challenge their students with hard and complex problems. Students need to try their level best to solve those problems. Even if they fail or make mistakes, teachers need to keep giving those challenges to the students but according to the capability of that student. It will help students to understand how to solve a complex problem. And they can also implement that in their life. 
  
Teachers need to model the assessment in such a way that students need to use their skills and learning. The assessment’s quality should be high so that the students’ real quality can be checked. 


1.3	Analyse models of learning preferences.

There are various types of learning preferences models. Few of them are:
1)	Fleming’s VARK Model- VARK represents for Visual, Auditory, Read/Write and Kinesthetic. Fleming and Mills (1992) state that “There are four types of learning styles categorized as (a) visual learners, (b) auditory learners, (c) kinesthetic learners, and (d) reading/writing learners.”
Visual Learners: These types of learners like to learn by using pictures, videos, diagrams, graphs. They like to learn by watching.
Auditory Learners: These types of learners like to learn by listening. Lectures, audio books, tapes are their favorite medium of learning.
Read and Write Learners: These types of learners like to learn by reading and writing. They tend to read first and then note what they have read.
Kinesthetic Learners: These types of learners like to learn by moving. They need to keep themselves moving or doing something so that they can enjoy the learning process.

2)	Kolb Learning Style Model: Kolb learning style model states that there are four cycles of learning and those are:
1)	Converging: These types of learners are more comfortable with problem solving and technical issues. They are good in finding solution for practical problems.
2)	Diverging: These types of learners learn by observing and thinking. Often they are the backbone of unique and creative ideas.
3)	Assimilating: Logic is more important than other things for these types of learners. They like logical and theoretical resources.
4)	Accommodating: Emotions, feelings and intuition are important for these types of learners. 

1.4	Explain how identifying and taking account of learners’ individual learning preferences enables inclusive teaching, learning and assessment


People tend to learn quickly and grasp the topics more quickly which them find the topic interesting and the learning process is enjoyable. If any individual learns by his/her preferred style, he/she will be able to enjoy the learning process and it will be easier to understand the topic. 

Inclusive practice in teaching and learning is important because the practice of inclusive learning brings diversity, equality to the school. If teachers recognize the importance of individual learning preferences, they can bring diversity and approach the students according to students learning preferences. Prioritizing students learning preferences will teachers plan and design the curriculum which will benefit the students most. Teachers will understand that two individuals are different and they have their type of learning style and they have characteristic differences. Prioritizing individual learning preferences will help the students to boost their confidence and cognitive development. It will bring equality and students will feel that everyone is the same when they will feel that they are also getting the same treatment as other students. As a result, students will be able to share their thoughts in the classwork and the environment in the classroom will become more friendly and productive.

In short, taking into account individual learning preferences will enable inclusive learning, teaching, and assessment.
2.1 Analyse theories, principles and models of communication

Communication is important in every sector of our life. Effective communication clears misconceptions, opens many ideas, and people can share their thoughts more effectively. Two theories of communication are given below: 
Jean Piaget’s Theory: Jean Piaget suggested that children develop their own cognitive through their observation, thinking, and connecting with nature. According to Vickers “He concluded that through their interactions with their environment, children actively construct their understanding of the world.” Piaget suggested that children learn and develop through four stages. Those four stages are: 

Sensory Motor period: In this period, children learn to interact with the world. This period is mostly around the child’s own life. According to Vickers “During the sensory-motor period, children's language is "egocentric": they talk either for themselves or "for the pleasure of associating anyone who happens to be there with the activity of the moment." 

Pre-Operational Period: Piaget suggested that in this stage child makes a different kind of symbols to represent their words and ideas and their wants. Their imagination and memory also develop in this stage. Piaget also names this stage the Symbolic stage. Later in this stage, a child started learning how to make simple sentences using words. At that time children become curious and start asking why and how the type of questions. According to Vickers “During this time, children’s language often shows instances of what Piaget termed “animism” and “egocentrism.” 

Concrete Operational: in this stage, children start to become more curious about the outside world instead of thinking about life only around them. They start to solve life problems on their own in this stage. 

Formal Operational: in this stage, children start to think logically and become more reasoning. In this stage, the child can use logic and abstract ideas to solve real-life problems.  

Bernstein Theory: According to Bernstein (1990, cited in Spring, 2002) “The code that a person uses indeed symbolizes their social identity.” Bernstein argued that the language people use while talking to each other determines what kind of relationship they share. People use a different kind of speech while talking to different people. According to Bernstein, there are two kinds of speech codes: 

1)	Elaborated Codes: This type of code is issued by people while talking with someone senior, a teacher, or a respected person. This is a formal code. This is used in textbooks, articles, meetings, or any formal occasion.

2)	Restricted Codes: This type of code is used by people in their daily life.      This type of code people use while talking in their homes, friends, juniors, and any informal occasions. This type of code is informal and is not used on any formal occasion. 


One Model of communication is analyzed and described below:

Eric Berne’s Ego State: Eric Berne suggested that every person goes through three ego stages. Those 3stages are: 

1.	Child Ego State: This ego stage is about the wants, needs, and feelings of a child. It is filled with the intuitions a child was born with. This stage can be divided into two sections: 1) The Natural Child who does what he wants, follows his heart, and want to have what he wants. 2) The adapted child who obeys his/her parents, adapts him/herself into the wishes, and wants of his/her parents. 
2.	Adult Ego State: This ego stage in which a person starts to talk reasonably and logically. This ego stage is about present feelings, emotions, and experiences. Adult ego stage is a stage in which a person asks for evidence and logics instead of predictions.  
3.	Parent Ego Stage: This is a stage in which people try to copy others people behavior and try to implement that into their own personality. People try to copy their parent, idols, or any other respected person’s behaviors and try act like that person. It does not come naturally instead people try to train the body to act like that.  


Three principles of communication are given below:

Clarity: Clarity in communication is important. While communicating, it is important that the whole speech is running around the main topics and ideas. Clarity in speeches and communication eradicates the chances of any kind of misconception. It fulfills the audience mind with correct information and message. The result of clarity in communication is that it develops trust between communicators. 
  
Concise: Conciseness is also important in communication. The sentences should be short and filled with necessary information. Speaker should filter out the unnecessary and out of context words from the speech. If the speech is concise, audience tend to enjoy the speech and they become more engaged with the speech. On the other hand, if the speech is not concise, audience start to feel bored and confused as they are not able to understand the main points. That is why, conciseness is important in communication. 
  
Complete: The sentences and speeches should be complete. Incomplete sentences give audience the chance to misunderstand and misinterpret the sentence. Along with those incomplete sentences make the audience confused. Complete sentences give all the key information to the audience and it leaves no chance for the audience to misinterpret the situation. It develops trust and enhances the relationship of communicators. 
 
2.2 Explain ways in which theories, principles and models of communication can be applied to teaching, learning and assessment


All people are different. Like that, all people do not like the same way of communication. Everyone has their preferred way of communication. 

As a teacher, I need to be aware of the fact that how to communicate with my students. Some students are extrovert who is open and can speak of their hearts openly. On the other hand, some are introverts and find it hard to speak in front of crowds. That is why I organize a one-to-one review session every week. In that session, I speak with the students about everything. From studying to mental health I try to review how they are doing. I try to use the restricted code of Bernstein's theory while communicating with the students so that I can be friendly and students can feel at ease while talking with me. Along with that, I try to determine which ego state they are in. And according to their ego state, I try to give them some advice that they can use to solve their problems. Moreover, I try to keep my lecture clear, concise, and complete so that the students do not get confused and all the points are conveyed to them perfectly. Along with that, I try to teach the students why it is important to communicate effectively and how effective communication can eradicate a good number of problems from the world. Furthermore, I try to motivate the students who are low in confidence. 

The Voice of teachers is important. Depending on the voice the whole environment of the classroom can change. That is why I try to keep my voice in a way that will get the attention of my students and they will be able to enjoy the lecture. 

To conclude, theories, principles, and models of communication can be applied to teaching, learning, and assessment in various ways.

3.1 Analyse theories, principles, and models of assessment 
  
One theory of assessment is described below: 
  
Inside black box – Formative Assessment: Small to big whatever happens in the classroom it affects the development and results of the students. By mentioning classroom, it is not necessarily meaning that the whole responsibility of making classroom environments better is the job of a teacher. It is a job which is needed to be done. According to Paul and Dylan (1998) “Such assessment becomes formative assessment when the evidence is actually used to adapt the teaching to meet student needs.”   Formative assessment is an assessment in which teachers monitor the ongoing progress of student's study and give honest feedback to the students. Paul and Dylan suggested three things to improve formative assessment in the classroom. Those 3things are: 
1.	The self-esteem of pupils: If students' self-esteem is high, they will be able to receive the teacher's feedback with more confidently. They will realize where they lack and they will know that they can turn their weaknesses in strengths. 
2.	 Self-assessment by pupils: Knowing about yourself is the best to develop yourself. According to Paul and Dylan (1998) “Thus self-assessment by pupils, far from being a luxury, is in fact an essential component of formative assessment.” If students can assess themselves, they will know their weak points. As a result, without anyone telling them, they can start to work on themselves to put away their weak points. 
3.	The evolution of effective teaching: The teaching method should be effective. Teachers should not just order students to do this and that. Students should also can share their thoughts and opinions. Homework and classwork should not be done just for the sake of it. It should be done with proper planning which will help students in learning and assessing themselves. According to Paul and Dylan (1998) “Discussion, observation of activities, and marking of written work can all be used to provide those opportunities, but it is then important to look at or listen carefully to the talk, the writing, and the actions through which pupils develop and display the state of their understanding”. 
  
One principle of assessment is described below: 
  
Linda Wilson’s CADET: According to Wilson (2014) "A principle is a rule that you will follow; it is an underlying standard that you will NOT compromise". Wilson introduced us with the principles of assessment which is CADET. CADET stands for Consistent, Accessible, Detailed, Earned, Transparent. 
1.	Consistent: The assessment should be consistent. 
2.	Accessible: All students regardless of race, gender should be able to access the assessment instructions. 
3.	Detailed: the assessment should cover all the learning of the course. 
4.	Earned: Every student should get what they deserve. 
5.	Transparent: The assessment should be clear to all the students and students should know why they are doing that. 
One model of assessment is given below: 
  
Assessment of Learning and Assessment for Learning: Assessment of learning is that type of assessment that occurs at the end of the teaching and learning and happens to judge the overall learning of the students. It is summative assessment and checks what the students have learned so far. On the other hand, assessment for learning is that type of assessment that occurs throughout the teaching process and it helps the students to develop and make themselves better. It is formative assessment. And teachers can decide how to take it and different teachers have unique ways to do it. 

3.2 Explain ways in which theories, principles and models of assessment can be applied in assessing learning 

  
Assessment is important for both assessing the students and making the student learning process better. It helps students to evaluate themselves and find out where they lack. Theories, principles, and models of assessment can be applied in assessing learning.  
  
Teachers can use the inside black box theory of Paul and Dylan to develop a productive environment in the classroom. The teachers need to make the student's self-esteem high and make them realize the importance of self-evaluation. Along with that, they need to teach effectively. They should create a teaching style in which students will be able to share their thought and make comments on how they need to learn and what the teachers need to improve to make the learning process better. Teachers can use traffic light cards to improve teaching. The students will share their thoughts on a specific question by using the cards. The teacher can immediately review the response, act, and plan accordingly. Teachers can use exit cards. It is like a survey where students will share their opinions after the class. It will help the teacher in understanding the response of the class and they can plan and act accordingly. The teachers can use the assessment for learning or formative assessment in their teaching. It will help the students to get more involved in the teaching. And the teacher will be able to review the student's progress even better. As a result, when the final assessment will take place, the students will be ready and they will be able to perform better. The teachers need to follow the CADET principle while assessing the students. It should be consistent, detailed, accessible to all the students, earned, and transparent.  
  
To conclude, theories, principles, and models of assessment can be applied in assessment learning in numerous ways. 


4.1 Analyse theories and models of curriculum and development


One model of curriculum development is Malclom Skillbeck’s. His model of curriculum is described below:

Malclom Skillbeck’s curriculum development model: Malclom Skillbeck’s proposed a curriculum which gives teachers the opportunities to define objectives, set goals, courses, learning and the way to teach students. He also added that while designing the curriculum the school’s cultures should also be taken care of. He proposed five ways to do it and they are:
1)	Situational Analysis: The curriculum should be made according to the situation. Social, cultural, educational, what school and parent want should be given priority while designing the curriculum. Along with that, students’ abilities, teachers abilities, and skills, schools funds, and tools also should be given priority.
2)	Objectives: The teachers, and management should make the decision about the goals and aims of school. They should look after some factors external and internal along with school’s, students, and teachers limitations, and parents expectations while making the objectives. 
3)	Design: How the teachers will teach the students, what materials will be used which teacher will take the course all are a part of design and programme building. 
4)	Implementation Phase: The whole action plan is implemented in this phase and teachers and management sit and discussed the whole curriculum and modify it according to the feedbacks of the teachers.
5)	Evaluation: This phase involves with the evaluation of the curriculum. Several surveys from the students can be done. After the term whether the curriculum has able to return the predicted objectives can be assessed in this phase.

4.2 Explain ways in which theories and models of curriculum development can be applied in developing curricula in own area of specialism

Theories and models of curriculum development can be applied in developing curricula in various ways. 
The most important thing in developing a curricula is to take care of the fact that how can the curricula can help the students in making their learning process easier and help them to earn knowledge and develop their brain. That is why in developing curricula I firstly choose the topics which are suited to context and can help the students in gaining the at most knowledge about the subject. 
Along with that I take care of the fact that the curriculum I am building whether it is correct according to the current situation. By current situation I mean that the curriculum should be suitable in social and cultural changes. The curriculum should be made keeping in the mind of the students’ and teachers abilities, skills, knowledge, and the amount of pressure both group of people can take. While making and designing the curricula I also take care of the fact that what the school want from the students and teachers. I develop the curricula according to the school’s objectives and goals. 
My main focus in developing the curricula remains on the fact that the students should gain knowledge from the topic. They should know why they are learning that. I tend to make the purpose and meaning of learning that topic clear to them. 
One fact that I always find irritating that the curricula does not give the students enough opportunities to apply their knowledge. They learn everything theoretically and very few opportunities remain in applying those theoretical things. But in real life the scenarios is completely opposite. Practical things come first and theory comes second in real life. That is why, I develop the curricula how the students can apply their knowledge practically and gain experience from it instead of learning just theory. It will help the students to gain experience and they will also have fun while learning. 

To conclude, theories and models of curriculum development can be applied in developing curricula in various ways. 

5.1 Analyse theories and models of reflection and evaluation

  
 
Reflection: Reflection is the process of realizing own mistakes, taking notes from those mistakes, and learning from those mistakes. It is a way of judging and assessing ourselves.  According to Conway (1994) “A process of looking back on what has been done and thinking on it and learning lessons from what did or did not work.” Reflecting on our own experiences and mistakes gives us the chance to gain knowledge by ourselves without the help of anyone else.  
  
   
  
Two theories of reflection and evaluation are David Kolb’s Experimental Learning and   
  
   
  
David Kolb’s Experimental Learning: According to David Kolb (1984) “Learning is the process whereby knowledge is created through the transformation of experience”. Kolb suggested that knowing what we get by our memories, experiences, and mistakes. Kolb’s experimental learning theory suggested that a learner goes through 4stages of the learning cycle. Those 4 stages are:  
  
1)	Concrete Experience: In this stage, a person is facing a situation. The situation can be completely new or like the experience or situation to the person. Kolb believed that a person must engage or face the new experience or situation by himself/herself to understand and gain knowledge from the situation. In this stage, students get to introduce a new topic or course and become curious to find the relativity of the topic.  
  
2)	Reflective Observation: This stage is the second stage of the learning cycle. In this stage, the person starts to look back on the new experience along with the importance, strengths, and weaknesses of the experience. In this stage, the students need to know why they should learn this topic. If they do not learn, what will happen? If they learn, what benefits will they get?  
  
3)	Abstract Conceptualization: In this stage, the learner starts to reflect on their knowledge. Reflection on their knowledge gives them the chance to modify their old knowledge or experience.  
  
4)	Active Experimentation: In this stage, the learner tries to implement what he/she has learned so far. And tries to understand and know the outcome of their knowledge and how the idea or knowledge performs in the real world.  


Greenaway Do-Review-Plan:  According to Greenaway (1992) “One of the main purposes of reviewing is to keep in touch with what participants are thinking and feeling, and that may not happen to correspond with a pre-planned reviewing sequence.” Reviewing gives people, the chance to reflect on their knowledge and experience and plan the next step effectively. Greenaway’s model was built on three straightforward steps. Those 3 steps are: 
 
 
1.	Do: In this stage or step, a person faces a new experience and tries to overcome the stage effectively. 
2.	Review: In this stage, the person starts to reflect on the experience he/she had. That person tries to find out the pros and cons of the experience. And that person also tries to understand his/her mistakes, and tries to learn from those mistakes. 
3.	Plan: In this stage, the person tries to plan the next experience in which he/she can design a plan that will give that person the chance not to repeat the mistakes he/she had done in the prior experiences. 
 


5.2 Explain ways in which theories and models of reflection and evaluation can be applied to reviewing own practice.


The theories and models of reflection can be applied to reflection and evaluation in my practice in several ways. According to Tanner (2012) “There is a growing interest in higher education in reflection and different ways to promote reflection in EL have been proposed, e.g. reflective journals, reflective pre-assessments, and reflective post-assessments.“ I believe students can make them learn more than anyone else. That is why I can use scaffolded questioning so that my students can be in the charge of their learning. Scaffolded questioning helps the students to remove self-doubts, negative emotions and help them to develop and increase self-esteem, confidence, and positive emotions. Along with that, I can ask the students to prepare a SWOT analysis of themselves. As a result, that, they will be able to know their strengths and weaknesses. As they and I know both know their strengths and weaknesses we can seat and prepare a plan in a one-to-one conversation which will be helpful for their learning and assessment. Moreover, I can use video recordings to review my sessions. I can figure out where did I make mistakes and what can be the plan to overcome my mistakes. Furthermore, I need to regularly attend the teachers training sessions to regularly update my skills and knowledge.  
  
Moreover, I need to seat with my students as a group and need to understand what they want from me and what are mistakes I am doing while teaching. They can give me some valuable suggestions which I can use to change my teaching style and give better learning and teaching experiences for my students.  
  
Furthermore, I need to identify the shortage of my skills and knowledge. The world and education system are updating regularly. The skills and knowledge should also need to regularly keep updating. That is why I need to do courses to improve my skills and knowledge. Along with that, I need to talk with professionals on how to update my skills and give a better teaching experience to the students.  
  
Another thing that I need to update myself about is the ability to analyze subjective experiences. Analyzing individual experiences will give me the chance to reflect on myself. It will show me my mistakes and strengths. As a result, I can plan how not to repeat the mistakes and plan accordingly how to avoid those mistakes in my next experience. 

To conclude, the theories and models of reflection can be applied to reflection and evaluation in my practice in several ways. 


Conclusion:

I described the theories, models and principles of learning, communication, assessment, curriculum development, assessment, and evaluation in this report. Along with that I analyzed and discussed how these theories, models, and principles can be applied to learning, teaching and my area of specialism.


